
Multiprotocol Label Switching is a routing technique in telecommunications networks that directs data from one node to the next based on labels rather than network addresses. A key optimization of this approach compared to others is labels identifying established paths in a network instead of the endpoint. MPLS supprots a range of access technologies, including T1/E1, ATM, [[Frame Relay]], [[802.3 (Ethernet)|Ethernet]], and [[Digital Subscriber Line (DSL)]].

In an MPLS network, labels are assigned to data [[Packet|packets]]. Packet-forwarding decisions are based solely on the label assigned to a packet rather than the contents of the packet offering a significant speed up compared to options. This abstraction allows one to create end-to-end circuits across any type of transport medium, using any protocol. This primary benefits is separating dependence from any [[OSI Model#Data Link|data link layer]] technology, and eliminating the need for multiple data link layer networks to satisfy different types of traffic. MPLS belongs to the family of [[Packet Switching|packet switched networks]].

MPLS works in conjunction with the [[Internet Protocol Suite (TCP IP)#Internet Protocol (IP)|Internet Protocol (IP)]] and its routing protocols, usually interior gateway protocols. In a pure IP network, the shortest path to a destination is chosen even when the path becomes congested. Meanwhile, in an IP network with MPLS Traffic Engineering CSPF routing, constraints such as RSVP bandwidth of the traversed links can also be considered, such that the shortest path with available bandwidth will be chosen. 

MPLS can make us of existing ATM network or [[Frame Relay]] infrastructure, as its labeled flows can be mapped to ATM or Frame Relay virtual-circuit identifiers, and vice versa.

Thes initial main idea behind MPLS was to increase routing speed. This is irrelevant due to newer switching methods such as [[Application-Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC)]], [[Content Addressable Memory (CAM)#Ternary CAMs|TCAM]], and [[Content Addressable Memory (CAM)|CAM]]-based switching ablet to forward plain IPv4 as fast as MPLS labeled packets. Now the main benefit is to implement layer 3 or layer 2 service providers type [[Virtual Private Network (VPN)|VPNs]] over [[Internet Protocol Suite (TCP IP)#IPv4|IPv4]] networks.