
In telecommunications, packet switching is a method of grouping data into short messages in fixed format called [[Packet|packet]]s that are transmitted over a digital network. Packets are made of a [[Packet#Header|header]] and a [[Packet#Payload|payload]]. Data in the haeder is used by networking hardware to direct the packet to its destination, where the payload is extracted and used by an operation system, application software, or higher layer protocols. Packet switching is the primary basis for data communications in computer networks worldwide. 

Packet switching allows delivery of variable bit rate data streams, realized as sequences of short messages in fixed format over a computer network which allocates transmissions resources as needed using statistical multiplexing or dynamic bandwidth allocation techniques. As they traverse netowrking hardware, such as [[Network Switch|switches]] and [[Router|routers]], packets are received, buffered, queued, and retransmitted, resulting in variable latency and throughput depending on the link capacity and the traffic load on the network. Packets are normally forwarded by intermediate network nodes asynchronously using first in first out buffering, but may be forwarded according to some scheduling discipline for [[Fair Queuing|fair queuing]], [[Traffic Shaping|traffic shaping]], or for differentiated or guaranteed [[Quality of Service (QoS)|quality of service]], such as [[Weighted Fair Queuing|weighted fair queuing]] or [[Leaky Bucket|leaky bucket]]. Packet-based communication may be implemented with or without intermediate forwarding nodes (switches and routers). In case of a shared physical medium, the packets may be delivered according to a [[Channel Access Method|multiple access]] scheme.

In [[Cellular Network|cellular networks]] packet switching was originally used for only handling mobile data and not voice calls and text messages. Those were offloaded to a separate [[Circuit Switching|circuit switching]] network. This was the case for [[Cellular Network#2G|2G]] and [[Cellular Network#3G|3G]] but, [[Cellular Network#4G|4G]] switched exclusively to a packet switched network and cellular networks have continued using the model to today.

Packet switching may be classfied into [[Internet Protocol Suite (TCP IP)#User Datagram Protocol (UDP)|connectionless]] packet switching, also known as [[OSI Model#Datagram|datagram]] switching, and [[Internet Protocol Suite (TCP IP)#Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)|connection-oriented]] packet switching. Examples of connectionless systems are [[802.3 (Ethernet)|]], [[Internet Protocol Suite (TCP IP)#Internet Protocol (IP)|Internet Protocol (IP)]], and the [[Internet Protocol Suite (TCP IP)#User Datagram Model|User Datagram Model (UDP)]]. Connection-oriented systems include [[X.25]], [[Frame Relay]], [[Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS)]], and [[Internet Protocol Suite (TCP IP)#Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)|Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)]].

In telecommunication networks, packet switching is used to optimize the usage of channel capacity and increase robustness. Compared to [[Circuit Switching|circuit switching]], packet switching is highly dynamic, allocating channel capacity based on usage instead of explicit reservations. This boosts overall network efficiency but removes bandwidth guarantees. In practice, [[TCP Congestion Control|congestion control]] is generally used in [[Internet Protocol Suite (TCP IP)#Internet Protocol (IP)|Internet Protocol (IP)]] networks to dynamically negotiate capacity between connections. Packet switching allows for packets to be routed around a failed node allowing for significantly more robust networks.

