
IEEE 802.11 is part of IEEE 802 set of [[Local Area Network (LAN)]] technical standards, and specifies the set of [[Medium Access Control (MAC)]] and [[OSI Model#Physical|Physical Layer (PHY)]] protocols for implements [[Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN)]] computer communication.

The standard and amendments provide the basis for wireless network products using the Wi-Fi brand and are the world's most used wireless computer networking standards. 

The 802.11 family consists of a series of half-duplex over-the-air modulation techniques that use the same basic protocol. The 802.11 protocol family employs [[Carrier-Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance (CSMA CA)]] whreeby equipment listens to a channel for other users before transmitting each frame.
## 802.11 (Wi-Fi 0)

Featured up to 2Mb/s link rate at a 2.4 GHz frequency. Created in 1997.

## 802.11b (Wi-Fi 1)

Extends the throughput of 802.11 up to 11 Mb/s in the same 2.4 GHz band. Created in 1999

## 802.11a (Wi-Fi 2)

Created in 1999 this specification was an amendment to the 802.11 specification that defined requirements for an [[Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing (OFDM)]] communication system. The link rate spread from 6 - 54 Mbit/s at a 5GHz frequency.

## 802.11g (Wi-Fi 3)

Created in 2003, and brings the speed of 802.11a, which is 54Mbit/s transfer rate, and operates in the 2.4 GHz microwave band.

## 802.11n (Wi-Fi 4)

Created in 2009, this specification utilizes several antennas to increase data rates. The maximum link rate is 600 Mb/s in both the 2.4 and 5 GHz frequencies. This was also the specification when all previous specifications were retroactively reffered to as Wi-Fi x. Even though data rates can get to 600 Mb/s in 40 MHz mode with 4 antennas, the 2.4 GHz band is very congested in most urban areas leading to better results occurring by adding more antennas in the 20 MHz mode.

## 802.11ac (Wi-Fi 5)

Created in 2013, this specification ups the maximum link rate to 6.933 Gb/s on the 5 GHz band. This is achieved by extending he air-interface concepts embraced by 802.11n: wider RF bandwidth (up to 160MHz), more MIMO spatial streams (8 downlink streams), downlink multi-user MIMO, and high-density modulation. The breadth on variations on this specification increased significantly compared to 802.11n.

## 802.11ax (Wi-Fi 6 & 6E)

Developed in 2021, this specification ups the maximum link rate to 9.608 Gb/s. Default Wi-Fi 6 only operates in the 2.4 and 5 GHz bands. While Wi-Fi 6E offers the capabilities of Wi-Fi 6 in the 6 GHz range. A main advancement with this specification is boosting the data speed in crowded spaces. Though the top end speed only increases by 37% over 802.11ac, the total network speed increases by 300%, making it more efficient and reducing latency by 75%. This quadrupling of overall throughput is made possilbe by a implementing [[Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing (OFDM)]].

## 802.11be (Wi-Fi 7)

This specification is expected to be adopted in 2024. Throughput is believed to reach a theoretical maximum of 46 Gb/s, although actual results are much lower. The Development of this amendment is still ongoing, with an initial draft in March 2021, and a final version expected by the end of 2024. Despite this, numerous products have retail availability based on the draft standards in early 2023.

## 802.11bn (Wi-Fi 8)

This specification is expected to be adopted in 2028. This specification has already been dubbed Ultra High Reliability (UHR). Thes goal of 802.11bn is to reach 100 Gb/s which outpaces copper Ethernet which tops out at 40 Gb/s. This will require retrofitting ceiling-mounted access points with [[Single-Mode Optical Fiber]]. This specification will also require more advanced antennas for channels above 6 GHz and will be attenuated by rain outdoors.


## RTS/CTS

RTS/CTS (Request to send/clear to send) is the optional mechanism used by the 802.11 wireless networking protocol to reduce frame collisions introduced by the hidden node problem. Originally the protocol fixed the expored node problem as well, but later RTS/CTS does not, but includes ACKs. 