In computing, a firewall is a network security system that monitors and controls incoming and outgoing network traffic based on predetermined security rules. A firewall typically establishes a barrier between a trusted network and an untrusted network, such as the Internet.

Firewalls are categorized as a network-based system. Network-based firewalls are positioned between tow or more network, typically between [[Local Area Network (LAN)]] and [[Wide Area Networks (WAN)]], their basic function being to control the flow of data between connected networks.

## Service-dependent Filtering

Service-dependent filtering blocks traffic based on the port numbers specified in the [[OSI Model#Transport|Transport Layer]] header fields. Because post numbers represent specific applications, you can use them to prevent traffic generated by these applications from reaching a network. 

## IP Address Filtering

IP address filtering is at the network layer.

## Deep Packet Inspection (DPI)

Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) scans the contents of packets, rather than their headers. 


## New Generation Firewall (NGFW)

New Generation Firewall (NGFW) defines a device with advanced protection capabilities; port number scanning is a basic firewall function. Deep Packet Inspection is that examines the data carried in packets and not just protocol headers. DPI is generally only supported on NGFW. While Stateful packet inspection, [[Network Address Translation (NAT)|NAT]], and [[Virtual Private Network (VPN)|VPN]] are often supported by traditional firewalls.

## Stateful Firewall

In computing, a stateful firewall is a network-based firewall that individually tracks sessions of network connections traversing it. Stateful packet inspection is a security feature often used in non-commercial and business networks. A stateful firewall examines other [[OSI Model#Network|Network]] and [[OSI Model#Transport|Transport]] layer header fields, looking for patterns that indicate damaging behaviors, such as [[Internet Protocol Suite (TCP IP)#Internet Protocol (IP)|IP]] spoofing, [[SYN Flood|SYN floods]], and [[Teardrop Attack|teardrop attack]]. Port number filtering is the most commonly used form of packet filtering; it is not the same as stateful packet inspection. Blocking traffic based on IP addresses prevents specific systems from accessing a network; stateful packet inspection is a much more complicated operation. Packet filtering based on protocol identifiers enables you to block [[Internet Protocol Suite (TCP IP)#Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)|TCP]] traffic; this is not stateful packet inspection.